[book] Document ECC gadget in circuit (#54)
zcash/orchard: book/src/design/circuit/gadgets/ecc/fixed-base-scalar-mul.md

# Fixed-base scalar multiplication

There are $6$ fixed bases in the Orchard protocol:
- $\mathcal{K}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$, used in deriving the nullifier;
- $\mathcal{G}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$, used in spend authorization;
- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{NoteCommit}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$;
- $\mathcal{V}$ and $\mathcal{R}$ bases for $\mathsf{ValueCommit}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$; and
- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{Commit}^{\mathsf{ivk}}$.

## Witness scalar
In most cases, we multiply the fixed bases by $255-$bit scalars from $\mathbb{F}_q$. We decompose a full-width scalar $\alpha$ into $85$ $3$-bit windows:

$$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

At the point of witnessing the scalar, we range-constrain each $3$-bit word of its decomposition.
$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
9 & q_\text{witness-scalar-fixed} \cdot \texttt{range\_check}(k_i, 8) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

> where $\texttt{range\_check}(k_i, \texttt{range}) = k_i \cdot (1 - k_i) \cdots (\texttt{range} - 1 - k_i).$

Reviewer: This isn't what's actually implemented. The implementation uses `Iterator::fold(1, ...)` which introduces a (superfluous) constant (which is fixed into the constraint polynomial). However, I just noticed that Rust 1.51 stabilised [`Iterator::reduce`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.reduce) which is the same as `fold` but uses the first element of the iterator as the initial value. We should check through the chip impls to use this where it makes sense, such as here (which would bring the impl back in line with this).

Reviewer 2: Yes we should change the implementation, not the doc.

Author: The implementation has been updated to match this doc.

z_2 &= (z_1 - k_1) / 2^3\\
    &= k_2 + (2^3) k_3 + ... + 2^{3(82)} k_{84},\\
    &\cdots,\\
z_{84} &= k_{84}\\
z_{85} &= (z_{84} - k_{84}) / 2^3\\
       &= 0.
\end{aligned}
$$

Since we don't directly witness this decomposition, we must range-constrain the difference at each step of the running sum. We also constrain the final output of the running sum to be $0$.
$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
9 & q_\text{decompose-base-field} \cdot \texttt{range\_check}(z_i - z_{i+1} \cdot (2^3), 8) = 0 \\\hline
2 & q_\text{decompose-base-field} \cdot z_{85} = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

We also enforce canonicity of this decomposition. That is, we want to check that $0 \leq \alpha < p,$ where $p$ the is Pallas base field modulus $$p = 2^{254} + t_p = 2^{254} + 45560315531419706090280762371685220353.$$ Note that $t_p < 2^{130}.$

To do this, we decompose $\alpha$ into three pieces: $$\alpha = \alpha_0 \text{ (252 bits) }  || \alpha_1 \text{ (2 bits) } || \alpha_2 \text{ (1 bit) }.$$

We check the correctness of this decomposition by:
$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline

> 5 & q_\text{canon-base-field} \cdot \texttt{range\_check}(\alpha_1), 4) = 0 \\\hline
> 3 & q_\text{canon-base-field} \cdot \texttt{range\_check}(\alpha_2), 2) = 0 \\\hline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5 & q_\text{canon-base-field} \cdot \texttt{range\_check}(\alpha_1, 4) = 0 \\\hline
3 & q_\text{canon-base-field} \cdot \texttt{range\_check}(\alpha_2, 2) = 0 \\\hline
```

# Fixed-base scalar multiplication

There are $5$ fixed bases in the Orchard protocol:
- $\mathcal{K}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$, used in deriving the nullifier;
- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{NoteCommit}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$;
- $\mathcal{V}$ and $\mathcal{R}$ bases for $\mathsf{ValueCommit}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$; and
- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{Commit}^{\mathsf{ivk}}$.

## Witness scalar
In most cases, we multiply the fixed bases by $255-$bit scalars from $\mathbb{F}_q$. We decompose a full-width scalar $\alpha$ into $85$ $3$-bit windows:

$$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

## Load fixed base

> Then, we precompute multiples of the fixed base $B$ for each window. This takes the form of a window table: $M[0..84][0..7]$ such that:

Reviewer 2: `M[0..85)[0..8)` seems best to me.

- for the first 84 rows $M[0..83][0..7]$: $M[w][k] = [(k+1) \cdot (2^3)^w]B$
- in the last row $M[84][0..7]$: $M[w][k] = [k \cdot (2^3)^w - \sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} (2^3)^j]B$

> The additional $(k + 1)$ term lets us avoid adding the point at infinity in the case $k = 0$. We offset these accumulated terms by subtracting them in the final window $- \sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} (2^3)^j$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The additional $(k + 1)$ term lets us avoid adding the point at infinity in the case $k = 0$. We offset these accumulated terms by subtracting them in the final window, i.e. we subtract $\sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} (2^3)^j$.
```

2. Check that $(x_w, y_w)$ is on the curve: $y_w^2 = x_w^3 + b$.
3. Witness $u_w$ such that $y_w + z_w = u_w^2$.
4. Use [incomplete addition](./incomplete-add.md) to sum the $M[w][k_w]$'s, resulting in $[\alpha]B$.

Constraints:
 - $x_w = \mathcal{L}_x[w](k_w)$;
 - $y_w^2 = x_w^3 + b,$ where $b = 5$ (from the Pallas curve equation);
 - $u_w^2 = y_w + Z[w].$

### Fixed-base scalar multiplication with signed short exponent
This is used for $\mathsf{ValueCommit^{Orchard}}$. We want to compute $\mathsf{ValueCommit^{Orchard}_{rcv}}(\mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}}) = [\mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}}] \mathcal{V} + [\mathsf{rcv}] \mathcal{R}$, where
$$
-(2^{64}-1) \leq \mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}} \leq 2^{64}-1
$$

$\mathsf{v^{old}}$ and $\mathsf{v^{new}}$ are each already constrained to $64$ bits (by their use as inputs to $\mathsf{NoteCommit^{Orchard}}$).

Witness the sign $s$ and magnitude $m$ such that
$$
s \in \{-1, 1\} \\
m \in [0, 2^{64}) \\
\mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}} = s \cdot m
$$

Then compute $P = [m] \mathcal{V}$, and conditionally negate $P$ using $(x, y) \mapsto (x, s \cdot y)$.

> We can reuse the window table from full-width fixed-base scalar multiplication, but with only $\mathsf{ceil}(64 / 3) = 22$ windows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We compute the window table in a similar way to full-width fixed-base scalar multiplication,
but with only $\mathsf{ceil}(64 / 3) = 22$ windows.
```

- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{Commit}^{\mathsf{ivk}}$.

## Witness scalar
In most cases, we multiply the fixed bases by $255-$bit scalars from $\mathbb{F}_q$. We decompose a full-width scalar $\alpha$ into $85$ $3$-bit windows:

$$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

## Load fixed base
Then, we precompute multiples of the fixed base $B$ for each window. This takes the form of a window table: $M[0..85)[0..8)$ such that:

- for the first 84 rows $M[0..84)[0..8)$: $$M[w][k] = [(k+2) \cdot (2^3)^w]B$$
- in the last row $M[84][0..8)$: $$M[w][k] = [k \cdot (2^3)^w - \sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} 2^{3j+1}]B$$

The additional $(k + 2)$ term lets us avoid adding the point at infinity in the case $k = 0$. We offset these accumulated terms by subtracting them in the final window, i.e. we subtract $\sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} 2^{3j+1}$.

> Note: Although an offset of $(k + 1)$ would naively suffice, it introduces an edge case when $k_0 = 7, k_1= 0$.
> In this case, the window table entries evaluate to the same point:
> * $M[0][k_0] = [(7+1)*(2^3)^0]B = [8]B,$
> * $M[1][k_1] = [(0+1)*(2^3)^1]B = [8]B.$
>

> > In fixed-base scalar multiplication, we summing the multiples of $B$ at each window using incomplete addition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In fixed-base scalar multiplication, we sum the multiples of $B$ at each window using incomplete addition.
```

- Define a Lagrange interpolation polynomial $\mathcal{L}_x(k)$ that maps $k \in [0..8)$ to the $x$-coordinate of the multiple $M[w][k]$, i.e.
  $$
  \mathcal{L}_x(k) = \begin{cases}
    ([(k + 2) \cdot (2^3)^w] B)_x &\text{for } w \in [0..84); \\
    ([k \cdot (2^3)^w - \sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} 2^{3j+1}] B)_x &\text{for } w = 84; \text{ and}
  \end{cases}
  $$
- Find a value $z_w$ such that $z_w + (M[w][k])_y$ is a square $u^2$ in the field, but the wrong-sign $y$-coordinate $z_w - (M[w][k])_y$ does not produce a square.

Repeating this for all $85$ windows, we end up with:
- an $85 \times 8$ table $\mathcal{L}_x$ storing $8$ coefficients interpolating the $x-$coordinate for each window. Each $x$-coordinate interpolation polynomial will be of the form
$$\mathcal{L}_x[w](k) = c_0 + c_1 \cdot k + c_2 \cdot k^2 + \cdots + c_7 \cdot k^7,$$
where $k \in [0..8), w \in [0..85)$ and $c_k$'s are the coefficients for each power of $k$; and
- a length-$85$ array $Z$ of $z_w$'s.

We load these precomputed values into fixed columns whenever we do fixed-base scalar multiplication in the circuit.

## Fixed-base scalar multiplication

> Given a decomposed scalar $\alpha$ and a fixed base $B$, we compute $[\alpha]B$ as such:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given a decomposed scalar $\alpha$ and a fixed base $B$, we compute $[\alpha]B$ as follows:
```

1. For each $k_w, w \in [0..85), k_w \in [0..8)$ in the scalar decomposition, witness the $x$- and $y$-coordinates $(x_w,y_w) = M[w][k_w].$
2. Check that $(x_w, y_w)$ is on the curve: $y_w^2 = x_w^3 + b$.
3. Witness $u_w$ such that $y_w + z_w = u_w^2$.
4. For all windows but the last, use [incomplete addition](./incomplete-add.md) to sum the $M[w][k_w]$'s, resulting in $[\alpha]B$.
5. For the last window, use complete addition $M[83][k_{83}] + M[84][k_{84}]$ and return the final result.

> > Note: complete addition is required in the final step to correctly map $[0]B$ to a representation of the point at infinity, $(0,0)$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: complete addition is required in the final step to correctly map $[0]B$ to a representation of the point at infinity, $(0,0)$; and also to handle a corner case for which the last step is a doubling.
```

# Fixed-base scalar multiplication

There are $6$ fixed bases in the Orchard protocol:
- $\mathcal{K}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$, used in deriving the nullifier;
- $\mathcal{G}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$, used in spend authorization;
- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{NoteCommit}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$;
- $\mathcal{V}$ and $\mathcal{R}$ bases for $\mathsf{ValueCommit}^{\mathsf{Orchard}}$; and
- $\mathcal{R}$ base for $\mathsf{Commit}^{\mathsf{ivk}}$.

## Witness scalar
In most cases, we multiply the fixed bases by $255-$bit scalars from $\mathbb{F}_q$. We decompose a full-width scalar $\alpha$ into $85$ $3$-bit windows:

> $$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem correct to me. \alpha actually does have to be canonical, because if it's only correct modulo p, that is different from it being correct modulo q (i.e. in the scalar field).

> $$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

Reviewer: My point is that we never need to represent `alpha` as a base field element, or compute with it modulo p; it is witnessed purely as bits, and the fixed-base scalar mul will calculate the correct result whether or not `alpha` is canonical modulo q. If you are assuming something different, please say so!

> $$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

Reviewer: If necessary, my suggestion can be clarified thusly:
```
$\alpha$ is allowed to be non-canonical modulo $q$; ...
```

> $$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

Reviewer 2: I think saying "$\alpha$ is allowed to be non-canonical" does more harm than good. We do need the scalar used in nullifier computation to be canonical, otherwise there would be a double-spend bug! How about this:

```suggestion
$$\alpha = k_0 + k_1 \cdot (2^3)^1 + \cdots + k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84}, k_i \in [0..2^3).$$

The scalar multiplication will be computed correctly for $k_{0..84}$ representing any integer in the range $[0, 2^{255})$. If $k_{0..84}$ is witnessed directly then no issue of canonicity arises. If the scalar is given as a base field element, then care must be taken to ensure a canonical representation, since $2^{255} > p$. This occurs, for example, in the scalar multiplication for the nullifier computation of the Action circuit.

$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
9 & q_\text{scalar-fixed} \cdot 1 \cdot \left(\sum\limits_{i=0}^7{w - i}\right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$
```

where $k \in [0..8), w \in [0..85)$ and $c_k$'s are the coefficients for each power of $k$; and
- a length-$85$ array $Z$ of $z_w$'s.

We load these precomputed values into fixed columns whenever we do fixed-base scalar multiplication in the circuit.

## Fixed-base scalar multiplication
Given a decomposed scalar $\alpha$ and a fixed base $B$, we compute $[\alpha]B$ as follows:

1. For each $k_w, w \in [0..85), k_w \in [0..8)$ in the scalar decomposition, witness the $x$- and $y$-coordinates $(x_w,y_w) = M[w][k_w].$
2. Check that $(x_w, y_w)$ is on the curve: $y_w^2 = x_w^3 + b$.
3. Witness $u_w$ such that $y_w + z_w = u_w^2$.
4. For all windows but the last, use [incomplete addition](./incomplete-add.md) to sum the $M[w][k_w]$'s, resulting in $[\alpha - k_{84} \cdot (2^3)^{84} + \sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} 2^{3j+1}]B$.
5. For the last window, use complete addition $M[83][k_{83}] + M[84][k_{84}]$ and return the final result.

> Note: complete addition is required in the final step to correctly map $[0]B$ to a representation of the point at infinity, $(0,0)$; and also to handle a corner case for which the last step is a doubling.

Constraints:

>  - $x_w = \mathcal{L}_x[w](k_w)$;
>  - $y_w^2 = x_w^3 + b,$ where $b = 5$ (from the Pallas curve equation);
>  - $u_w^2 = y_w + Z[w].$

Reviewer: ```suggestion$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
8 & q_\text{mul-fixed} \cdot \left( \mathcal{L}_x[w](k_w) - x_w \right) = 0 \\\hline
4 & q_\text{mul-fixed} \cdot \left( y_w^2 - x_w^3 - b \right) = 0 \\\hline
3 & q_\text{mul-fixed} \cdot \left( u_w^2 - y_w - Z[w] \right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$

where $b = 5$ (from the Pallas curve equation).
```

### Fixed-base scalar multiplication with signed short exponent
This is used for $\mathsf{ValueCommit^{Orchard}}$. We want to compute $\mathsf{ValueCommit^{Orchard}_{rcv}}(\mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}}) = [\mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}}] \mathcal{V} + [\mathsf{rcv}] \mathcal{R}$, where
$$
-(2^{64}-1) \leq \mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}} \leq 2^{64}-1
$$

$\mathsf{v^{old}}$ and $\mathsf{v^{new}}$ are each already constrained to $64$ bits (by their use as inputs to $\mathsf{NoteCommit^{Orchard}}$).

Witness the sign $s$ and magnitude $m$ such that
$$
s \in \{-1, 1\} \\
m \in [0, 2^{64}) \\
\mathsf{v^{old}} - \mathsf{v^{new}} = s \cdot m
$$

Then compute $P = [m] \mathcal{V}$, and conditionally negate $P$ using $(x, y) \mapsto (x, s \cdot y)$.

We compute the window table in a similar way to full-width fixed-base scalar multiplication,

> but with only $\mathsf{ceil}(64 / 3) = 22$ windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but with only $\mathsf{ceil}(64 / 3) = 22$ windows. The first 21 windows are full

$$
\begin{array}{|c|l|}
\hline
\text{Degree} & \text{Constraint} \\\hline
9 & \text{21 3-bit constraints} \\\hline
3 & q_\text{scalar-fixed-short} \cdot \left(\mathbf{m}_0 \cdot (1 - \mathbf{m}_0)\right) = 0 \\\hline
3 & q_\text{scalar-fixed-short} \cdot \left(s^2 - 1\right) = 0 \\\hline
\end{array}
$$
```

## Load fixed base
Then, we precompute multiples of the fixed base $B$ for each window. This takes the form of a window table: $M[0..85)[0..8)$ such that:

- for the first 84 rows $M[0..84)[0..8)$: $$M[w][k] = [(k+2) \cdot (2^3)^w]B$$
- in the last row $M[84][0..8)$: $$M[w][k] = [k \cdot (2^3)^w - \sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} 2^{3j+1}]B$$

> The additional $(k + 2)$ term lets us avoid adding the point at infinity in the case $k = 0$. We offset these accumulated terms by subtracting them in the final window, i.e. we subtract $\sum\limits_{j=0}^{83} 2^{3j+1}$.

Author: Explain why `k+2` is needed and `k+1` is not sufficient
